Beginning with a series of startling actions in the early 1970s, Chris Burden challenged his own mental and physical limitations, as well as the boundaries of art and performance. Shut inside a locker for five days (Five Day Locker, 1971); shot in the arm (Shoot, 1971); and nailed through the palms of his hands to the roof of a car (Trans-fixed, 1974), he sought to reflect the violence that defined American politics, society, and media at the time. Burden soon channeled the daring spirit of these early performances into imposing technical feats that similarly explored challenges both individual and social. He used toys (figurines, train sets, Erector parts) as the building blocks for expansive scale models of buildings, dystopic cities, and battlefields, while deploying actual vehicles (ships, trucks, and cars) in surreal and improbable ways.

Buddha's Fingers (2014–15) is a dense cluster of thirty-two antique cast-iron vernacular street lamps, electrified with cool, bright LED bulbs and standing almost twelve feet tall. The work is related to Urban Light (2008), Burden's celebrated permanent installation of 202 lamp posts, which stands at the entrance to LACMA in Los Angeles. In 2000, Burden began collecting the street lamps that used to line residential streets in Los Angeles during the 1920s and 1930s, and repurposed them as sculptural installations. In Buddha’s Fingers, the hexagonal lamp bases are set in a tight honeycomb formation. The whimsical title refers to the fingered citrus fruit “buddha's hand,” a recurrent still-life motif and subject in classical Asian art, and a religious symbol of happiness, longevity, and good fortune.

Chris Burden was born in Boston, Massachusetts in 1946, and died in Topanga Canyon, California in 2015. Public collections include Museum of Modern Art, New York; Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; and Tate Modern, London. Solo museum exhibitions include “Chris Burden: A Twenty Year Survey,” Orange County Museum of Art, Newport Beach, California (1988, traveled to Carnegie Mellon Art Gallery, Pittsburgh; and Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, through 1989); “When Robots Rule: The Two Minute Airplane Factory,’ Tate Gallery, London (1999); “Tower of Power,’ Museum Moderner Kunst Stiftung Ludwig, Vienna (2002); “Chris Burden,” Baltic Center of Contemporary Art, Gateshead (2002); “14 Magnolia Doubles,” South London Gallery (2006); “Chris Burden,” Middleheim Museum, Antwerp (2009); “Chris Burden: Three Ghost Ships,” Portland Art Museum (2011–12); “Chris Burden,” Magasin III, Stockholm (2012–13); “Chris Burden: Extreme Measures,” New Museum, New York (2013–14); “Chris Burden: The Master Builder,” Rose Art Museum, Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts (2014); and “Chris Burden: Ode to Santos Dumont,” Los Angeles County Museum of Art (2015).

In the light of current geopolitical realities and aesthetic debates, Grotjahn's evocation of Captain America may be timely, if not more than a little ironic. Appearing in the early 1940s, the comic-book hero was designed as a patriotic super-soldier who fought the Axis powers of World War II. Aka Steve Rogers, a scrawny artist enhanced to the peak of natural human potential by an experimental serum, Captain America wears a costume that bears a stars-and-stripes motif, a hood emblazoned with an A—America (or Art?)—and is armed with a protective shield against all foes. Although he often struggles to maintain his ideals as a man out of time with modern realities, after seventy years he remains a beloved national figure, combatting those who espouse ideals contrary to the American Dream, from Nazism to technocratic fascism, and international and domestic terrorism.

In the large-scale, ten-part drawing with its centrifugal radiant motif, Grotjahn synthesizes the comic-book hero into pure, vibrating lines of force in symbolic red, white, and blue. Geometry and process resonate with each other in the razor-sharp perspectival rays and random, all-over marks—traces of Grotjahn's tenacious working method, as he moves from one drawing to another—as well as the skeins of acid-yellow calligraphy that surface from time to time, like an Abstract Expressionist palimpsest.

In America, the impact of twentieth-century capitalism on art promoted an increasing fixation with the sign and the series—Andy Warhol's Brillo Boxes and Campbell's Soup Cans, Jasper Johns's targets and flags, Robert Indiana's LOVE sculptures and paintings, to name just a few. With his Sign Exchange project of 1993–98, Grotjahn aligned himself with this astute mixture of readymade and artisanal, and high and low art, replacing the homemade signs of local shopkeepers with his own handpainted copies, and exhibiting the shop originals as his own artwork.

Almost concurrently, he began working on a stream of densely worked colored-pencil drawings with radiant motifs, focusing on perspectival investigations such as dual and multiple vanishing points, techniques used since the Renaissance to create the illusion of depth and volume on a two-dimensional surface. In the Butterfly drawings, the motif appears as a more organic iteration of its perspectival precedent. Anchored to sloping vertical lines, the closely adjacent, triangular motifs achieve a vital dynamism, animated with a kaleidoscopic flutter. These formalist compositions of complex asymmetries and glowing, tonal color allude to the multiple narratives coursing through the history of modernism, from the utopian visions of Russian Constructivism to the hallucinatory images of Op art. The disruptive presence of errant marks and smudges across the surface of each drawing introduces a sense of active contingency into compositions that are otherwise highly controlled.

In addition to the multitudes of individual compositions, Grotjahn has produced several magisterial sequential drawings, consistent with the modernist fascination for serial iteration as free, constructive becoming. The multi-panel pencil drawing, Untitled (Dancing Black Butterflies) (2007), proposes a sort of formal and historical endgame, an enlivened dance of death for the butterfly motif, the normally rainbow-hued "wings" here pared back to Suprematist black. Conversely, Untitled (Captain America), Grotjahn's most monumental drawing series to date, dazzles with the explosive energies of its tricolor motif pulsing across the gallery walls.

The exhibition is accompanied by a fully illustrated catalogue with an essay by David Anfam.

A concurrent exhibition of Grotjahn's Sign Exchange project (1993–98) will be presented at Karma, New York from January 9–February 7, 2016.

Mark Grotjahn was born in 1968 in Pasadena, CA. He received an MFA from the University of California, Berkeley, and a BFA from the University of Colorado, Boulder. He lives and works in Los Angeles, CA.

Grotjahn's work is included in museum collections worldwide, including the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; The Broad, Los Angeles; SFMOMA, San Francisco; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh; Des Moines Art Center, Iowa; Cleveland Museum of Art, Ohio; Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C.; Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; Tate Modern, London; and the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.

Solo exhibitions include Hammer Museum, Los Angeles (2005); Whitney Museum of American Art, New York (2006); Kunstmuseum Thun, Switzerland (2007); Portland Art Museum, Oregon (2010); Aspen Museum of Art, Colorado (2012); Nasher Sculpture Center, Dallas (2014); and Kunstverein Freiburg, Germany (2014). Major group exhibitions include Whitney Biennial 2006: "Day for Night," New York; the 54th Carnegie International, Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh (2004); "Painting in Tongues," Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (2006); "Oranges and Sardines," Hammer Museum, Los Angeles (2008); "Collection: MOCA's First Thirty Years," Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, (2009); "The Artist's Museum," Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (2010); "The Forever Now: Contemporary Painting in an Atemporal World," Museum of Modern Art, New York (2014); and "Variations: Conversations in and Around Abstract Painting," LACMA, Los Angeles (2014).


The 12 sculptures and 36 photographs that comprise the new series are at once referential and autonomous. The photographs—large, colorful, and spectacular with a nod to Pop art, and custom-framed in mahogany to emulate the style of boardroom furniture–speak to the bombast of national and corporate symbolism; the sculptures—stylized concrete flower-presses containing delicate preserved floral specimens and their documentation—operate in a discrete and classified zone.

A storyteller whose grist is the instability of fact, Simon’s research-driven approach has produced such impactful bodies of work as The Innocents (2002); An American Index of the Hidden and Unfamiliar (2007); Contraband (2010); and A Living Man Declared Dead and Other Chapters I-XVIII (2008–11); as well as the more whimsical The Picture Collection (2013), and Birds of the West Indies (2013–14). Simon takes empirical photography into the field of post-conceptual practice, with exacting attention to aesthetic and formal concerns.

For the new work, Simon's investigations yielded twin points of departure: George Sinclair's nineteenth century horticultural study (a book containing actual dried grass specimens), which influenced Charles Darwin's theory of evolution; and archival photographs in which flowers feature as silent witnesses in the stagecraft of political and economic power.

In Paperwork and the Will of Capital, Simon examines accords, treaties, and decrees drafted to influence systems of governance and economics, from nuclear armament to oil deals and diamond trading. All involve the countries present at the 1944 United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, which addressed the globalization of economics after World War II, leading to the establishment of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. In images of the signings of these documents, powerful men flank floral arrangements designed to underscore the importance of the parties present. Each of Simon’s recreations of these floral arrangements represents an “impossible bouquet”—a concept that emerged in Dutch still-life painting parallel to the country’s seventeenth-century economic boom, which ushered in the development of modern capitalism. The impossible bouquet, a collection of flowers that could never bloom naturally in the same season and geographic location, is an artificial fantasy made real in Simon’s photographs, thanks to the globalization of the modern flower industry.

For the recreated arrangements, Simon imported more than 4000 flower and plant specimens from the world’s largest flower auction in Aalsmeer, Netherlands, where 20 million flowers arrive and depart daily, bound for international retail destinations. Working with a botanist and from archival records, she identified all the flowers and remade the floral arrangements from each signing, then photographed them against striking bicolored fields relating to the foregrounds and backgrounds in the historical images, pairing each arrangement with a description of the pertinent accord. For the sculptures, selected specimens from the 36 arrangements were dried, pressed, and sewn to archival herbarium paper; a complete set of the 36 botanical collages was then placed in each of the 12 concrete presses, along with inkjet prints of their photographic likenesses and narrative texts--sealed together in a race against time.

Paperwork and the Will of Capital inquires into the instability of executive decision-making and the precarious nature of survival, as well as the reliability and endurance of records: the accords and their far-reaching effects, Simon’s photographs, and the preserved botanical specimens in their concrete presses; language itself. The vivid photographic still lifes stand in contrast to the sculptural natures mortes: as time advances, so may these artifacts transform, revealing mutable versions of themselves.

A fully illustrated catalogue published by Hatje Cantz and Gagosian will include essays by Kate Fowle and Nicholas Kulish, botanical texts by Daniel Atha, and a short story by Hanan al-Shaykh.

Taryn Simon (b. 1975) lives and works in New York City. She graduated from Brown University and was the recipient of a Guggenheim Fellowship in 2001. Permanent collections include Metropolitan Museum of Art, Museum of Modern Art, and Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; LACMA, Los Angeles; Tate Modern, London; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; and MMK, Frankfurt.

Recent museum exhibitions include “Taryn Simon: An American Index of the Hidden and Unfamiliar,” Whitney Museum of American Art, New York (2007); “A Living Man Declared Dead and Other Chapters I–XVIII,” Tate Modern, London (2011, traveled to Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Corcoran Gallery of Art, Washington, DC; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; and Ullens Center for Contemporary Art, Beijing); and “Rear Views, A Star-forming Nebula, and the Office of Foreign Propaganda,” Galerie nationale du Jeu de Paume, Paris (2015). Her work was included in the Gwangju Biennale (2008), Singapore Biennial (2011), 2013 Carnegie International, Yokohama Triennale (2014), and the 56th Biennale di Venezia (2015).

Simon's Birds of the West Indies I and II (2013–14) will be on view at the George Eastman Museum in Rochester, New York from February 13–May 15 of this year. Paperwork and the Will of Capital will be exhibited at Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow in March of this year and other institutional venues during 2016–17. Major solo exhibitions are planned at Galerie Rudolfinum, Prague and The Louisiana Museum, Denmark in 2016. Simon is also currently working on her first performative work, jointly commissioned by Park Avenue Armory, New York and Artangel, London to premier in September 2016.

For further information please contact the gallery at newyork@gagosian.com or at +1.212.741.1111. All images are subject to copyright. Gallery approval must be granted prior to reproduction.

Cathedral of the Pines (2013–14) was made during three productions in and around the rural town of Becket, Massachusetts. In images that recall nineteenth-century American and European paintings, Crewdson photographed figures in the surrounding forests, including the actual trail from which the series takes its title. Interior scenes charged with ambiguous narratives probe tensions between art, life, connection and separation, intimacy and isolation.

The series comprises thirty-one digital pigment prints, each measuring 45 × 58 inches framed. In Woman at Sink, a woman pauses from her household upkeep, lost in thought. In Pickup Truck, Crewdson portrays a nude couple in the flatbed of a truck in a dense forest—the woman seated, the man turned away in repose. Crewdson situates his disconsolate subjects in familiar settings, yet their cryptic actions—standing still in the snow, or nude on a riverbank—hint at invisible challenges. Precisely what these challenges are, and what fate awaits these anonymous figures, are left to the viewer's imagination.

For more than twenty years, Crewdson has used the streets and interiors of small-town America as settings for photographic incarnations of the uncanny. Working with a crew, he plans his images as meticulously as any movie director, from the nocturnal Twilight series (1998–2002); to the cerebral Beneath the Roses (2003–08); to Sanctuary (2009). His careful crafting of visual suspense conjures forebears such as Diane Arbus, Alfred Hitchcock, and Edward Hopper. In Cathedral of the Pines, Crewdson's persistent psychological leitmotifs evolve into intimate figurative dramas. 

A fully-illustrated book with an essay by art historian Alexander Nemerov will be released by Aperture in conjunction with the exhibition.

Gregory Crewdson was born in 1962 in Brooklyn, New York, and lives and works in New York City and Massachusetts. Public collections include Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Art Institute of Chicago; Fotomuseum Winterthur; and National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne. Recent solo exhibitions include “Gregory Crewdson: 1985–2005,” Kunstverein Hannover (2005, traveled to Kunstmuseen Krefeld; Fotomuseum Winterthur; and Landesgalerie Linz); “Gregory Crewdson: In a Lonely Place,” C/O Berlin (2011, traveled to Kulturhuset, Stockholm; The Black Diamond, Copenhagen; Stenersen Museum, Oslo; Centre for Contemporary Photography, Melbourne; Institute of Modern Art, Brisbane; City Gallery Wellington; and Dunedin Art Gallery); “Gregory Crewdson: Beneath the Roses,” Museum of Image and Sound, São Paulo (2014); “Gregory Crewdson: Fireflies,” Wave Hill, Bronx, New York (2014); and “Gregory Crewdson: Dream House,” San Diego Museum of Art (2015).

Portraiture was a shared focus of both artists, and they made use of repetition and serialization: Avedon through the reproducible medium of photography, and in his group photographs, for which he meticulously positioned, collaged, and reordered images; Warhol in his method of stacked screenprinting, which enabled the consistent reproduction of an image. Avedon’s distinctive gelatin-silver prints and Warhol's boldly colored silkscreens variously depict many of the same recognizable faces, including Marella Agnelli, Bianca Jagger, Jacqueline Kennedy, Marilyn Monroe, and Rudolf Nureyev.

Both Avedon and Warhol originated from modest beginnings and had tremendous commercial success working for major magazines in New York, beginning in the 1940s. The 1960s marked artistic turning points for both artists as they moved away increasingly from strictly commercial work towards their mature independent styles. The works in the exhibition, which date from the 1950s through the 1990s, emphasize such common themes as social and political power; the evolving acceptance of cultural differences; the inevitability of mortality; and the glamour and despair of celebrity.

Each gallery will juxtapose works that underscore these themes, beginning with The Family (1976), Avedon's ambitious conceptual portrayal of sixty-nine individuals at the epicenter of American politics at that time, together with Warhol’s monumental portrait of the revolutionary Mao Tse-tung, Mao (1972). In both works, little emotion or expression is revealed in the sitters' faces or postures. Such deadpan was a mark of Pop art ambivalence, more commonly associated with Warhol, but equally applicable in this instance to Avedon.

Both artists sought out individuals who were outside, as well as inside, the mainstream. For Avedon, this resulted in the larger-than-lifesize mural of Andy Warhol and members of The Factory (1969), who represented the heart of New York subculture and incarnated the sexual and cultural revolution. Meanwhile, Warhol memorialized the beauty of drag queens—who he once described as “ambulatory archives of ideal moviestar womanhood”—in his pioneering series of silkscreens, Ladies and Gentlemen (1975).

The third gallery contains an extended meditation on the darker side of human existence, as well as its potential salvation: Warhol’s Skull and Guns paintings are juxtaposed with photographs from Avedon’s Brandenburg Gate portfolio, taken during the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989.

Finally, celebrity was a topic that was equally explored by both artists: Avedon in his iconic images of Brigitte Bardot (1959) and Audrey Hepburn (1967); and Warhol in his dramatically rendered superstars, such as Double Elvis (1963) and Four Marilyns (Reversal Series) (1986). Driven by their cosmopolitan awareness and mindfulness of the potential for their work to stir change, as well as their diverse cast of modern muses, Avedon and Warhol harnessed the power of images to reflect the revolutionary social attitudes of their time.

A fully illustrated publication accompanying the exhibition will include essays by Michael Bracewell and Ara H. Merjian, as well as a chronology documenting the artists’ careers and points of intersection.

Richard Avedon was born in New York City in 1923 and died while on assignment for The New Yorker in San Antonio, Texas, in 2004. His work is included in the collections of major museums around the world, including the Museum of Modern Art, the Smithsonian, and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, along with countless other institutions worldwide. Avedon’s first museum retrospective was held at the Smithsonian Institution in 1962. Many major museum exhibitions have followed, including those at the Minneapolis Institute of Fine Arts (1970), Museum of Modern Art (1974), Whitney Museum of American Art (1994), and two at the Metropolitan Museum of Art (1978 and 2002). A 2007 retrospective exhibition organized by the Louisiana Museum of Modern Art in Denmark traveled to Milan, Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam, and San Francisco. “Richard Avedon: People” was presented at National Portrait Gallery, Canberra in 2013, and traveled to Art Gallery of Western Australia, Perth in 2014, and the Ian Potter Museum of Art, Melbourne from 2014–15.

Andy Warhol was born in Pittsburgh in 1928 and died in New York City in 1987. His work is included in public collections worldwide. His first major exhibition was at Ferus Gallery, Los Angeles, in 1962. Since then, his work has been the subject of numerous exhibitions in museums and galleries throughout the world, including retrospectives at Pasadena Art Museum (1970, traveled to Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; Stedelijk van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; Musée d’Art Moderne, Paris; Tate Gallery, London; and Whitney Museum of American Art, New York); Museum of Modern Art, New York (1989, traveled to Art Institute of Chicago; Hayward Gallery, London; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Palazzo Reale, Milan; and Musée National d’Art Moderne, Paris); and Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin (2001–02, traveled to Tate Modern, London; and Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles). Recent exhibitions include “Warhol: Headlines,” Galleria Nazionale d’Arte Moderna, Rome (2011–12); “Andy Warhol: Shadows,” Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (2014–15); “Transmitting Andy Warhol,” Tate Liverpool (2014–15); and “Andy Warhol: Campbell’s Soup Cans and Other Works, 1953–1967,” Museum of Modern Art, New York (2015).

“Fazor” alludes to the “phaser effect”: a musical swirl of oscillating sound that summons the hypno-psychedelic effects informing Korine's latest series of paintings. The large-scale, concentric circles that characterize this series expand upon the line and checker paintings in their embrace of vibrant color combinations. Inspired by sun motifs from the 1960s and 70s, the series conjures the Color-field paintings of Helen Frankenthaler, as well as the color spectrums of Robert Delaunay's Rhythm painting series. A combination of oilstick, acrylic, and house paint is applied to canvas or, in certain cases, reclaimed artworks from Korine's prior abstract series. The rings of each orb resemble the ripple effect, fanning out from a ten-sided star in the middle of each composition. The paintings also reveal improvisational marks, fingerprints, and inadvertent mistakes. Korine riffs on each work impulsively and embraces the physical vigor of repetition and pattern on a grand scale.

The Fazors oblige by the odd bliss of sensory assault; there is no beginning and no end to their effects. Like a tapestry at a headshop, a blazing star from MAD Magazine, or a Bridget Riley optical trance, these paintings thrive on surface tension. In Korine's figurative works, characters disappear and reemerge from a groundless terrain. Lurking ghosts and devilish characters fuse with dizzying loops at hyperspeed. Like Philip Guston's fleshy abstractions, they are animated by his loose touch. Together, the Fazors describe a world that expands and contracts like processed sound—the dream merges with the nightmare to envelop the viewer in the shimmer of the absurd.

Korine's cult films of the past twenty years—from Gummo (1997) to Spring Breakers (2012)—are uncanny insights into modern life. Their narratives confuse reality and fiction by way of partially scripted stories, montage, hand-held camerawork, and attention to the grotesque. Korine's films are experiments in suspended disbelief that cite narratives intimately related to his own biography with a sardonic twist. Improvised sequences and unplanned “mistakes” leave breadcrumbs of truth to lead viewers through a maddening reality. The films seek out “perfect nonsense,” as Korine mentioned in an interview in The Believer, “an emotional sense, rather than any kind of laid out logic or standard set of rules.”

Korine will be speaking at The British Film Institute Southbank on Wednesday, February 10, at 8:50pm in conjunction with the exhibition. Tickets can be purchased at whatson.bfi.org.uk.

Harmony Korine was born in Bolinas, California in 1973. He lives and works in Nashville, Tennessee. He has written and directed films including Gummo (1997), Julien Donkey-Boy (1999), Trash Humpers (2009), and Spring Breakers (2012). He has also collaborated extensively with director and photographer Larry Clark on films including Kids (1995) and Ken Park (2002, with Ed Lachman); and with Avi Korine on Mister Lonely (2007). Korine has generated photographs, text, drawings, paintings, and music in unconventional forms since 1998. Korine published his first novel, A Crack Up at the Race Riots, in 1998. Solo exhibitions of his films, photographs, and paintings include “Harmony Korine: Pigxote,” Vanderbilt University Fine Arts Gallery, Nashville (2009); and “Harmony Korine,” S.M.A.K, Ghent (2000). His work was included in the 50th Biennale di Venezia (2003); and the Whitney Biennial, Whitney Museum of American Art (2000).

For Oehlen, the practice of painting and its inherent unpredictability is a subject in itself. The guiding principles of his method are impulse and eclecticism, while his tools are fingers, brushes, collage, and computer. He often begins by imposing a set of rules or structural limitations—restricting his palette or deliberately working at a slow pace—while challenging himself to approach each painting differently. He treats abstraction as either gesture or geometry, superimposed, in combination, or conflated with a figurative register, as in readymade posters covered in smudges and stains. Pictorial form is a trigger rather than an end in itself.

In a group of aluminum-panel paintings rendered in a simple, striking palette in various combinations of red, black, blue and white, Oehlen creates tree-like forms as vehicles for a methodical deflation of content. Like Piet Mondrian and Georg Baselitz before him, the tree has been a recurring motif for Oehlen since the 1980s: in paintings such as Untitled (1989), the isolated, literally described trees undermine the common role of identifiable images through “bad” painting. In the new schematic forms—rendered in non-naturalistic contrasts of vivid red, black, white, and blue—trunks and branches become pure silhouettes that suggest the digital marks of art and design software, even though they have been meticulously hand-painted in oil paint. Flattening and overlapping surface, color, and content through cut-and-paste revisions of a fundamental biological form, Oehlen calls into question both nature versus the most essential tools of painting.

A forthcoming fully illustrated catalogue with an essay by Ann Goldstein will be published to accompany the exhibition. An artist talk between Albert Oehlen and Glenn Brown will take place on February 5, 2016 at Grosvenor Hill.

Albert Oehlen was born in 1954 in Krefeld, Germany and studied at Hochschule für Bildende Künste, Hamburg. From 2000-09 he was a professor of painting at Kunstakademie Düsseldorf. Recent solo exhibitions include “Réalité abstraite,” Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris (2009); “Albert Oehlen,” Kunstmuseum Bonn (2012); “Albert Oehlen: Malerei,” Museum Moderner Kunst, Vienna (2013); “Die 5000 Finger von Dr. Ö,” Museum Wiesbaden (2014); “Home And Garden,” New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York (2015); and “An Old Painting in Spirit,” Kunsthalle Zürich (2015)

Richard Serra was born in San Francisco in 1938 and has lived in New York since 1966. He studied at the University of California (Berkeley and Santa Barbara) and at Yale University. Serra was awarded the insignia of Chevalier de la légion d'honneur by the French government in June 2015.

Recent exhibitions include "Richard Serra Sculpture: Forty Years," Museum of Modern Art, New York (2007); "Richard Serra: Promenade," Monumenta, Grand Palais, Paris (2008); "Richard Serra Drawings—Work Comes Out of Work," Kunsthaus Bregenz (2008); and "Richard Serra Drawing: A Retrospective," Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York (2011, traveled to San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; and the organizing venue, Menil Collection, Houston).

In 2005, The Matter of Time (1994–2005), a series of eight monumental sculptures, was installed at the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao. East-West/West-East (2014) was permanently installed in the desert of the Brouq Nature Reserve in western Qatar in 2014.

Since 1983, Gagosian has presented more than twenty-five major exhibitions of Serra's work in the U.S. and Europe, including "Intersection II" (Gagosian New York, 1993); "Switch," which inaugurated Gagosian West 24th Street, New York in 1999; "Wake Blindspot Catwalk Vice-Versa" (Gagosian New York, 2003); "Junction/Cycle" (Gagosian New York, 2011); "Drawings" (Gagosian Paris, 2011–12); "Double Rifts" (Gagosian Beverly Hills, 2013); "New Sculpture" (Gagosian New York, 2013–14); the concurrent exhibitions "Backdoor Pipeline, Ramble, Dead Load, London Cross" and "Drawing" (Gagosian London, 2014–15); and "Ramble Drawings" (Gagosian New York, 2015). In spring of 2016, Gagosian New York will present new large-scale sculptures at the 21st and 24th Street galleries.

Cultivating an eclectic formalism across mediums, Ruby creates vivid poured-polyurethane sculptures, drawings, collages, richly glazed ceramics, spray paintings, and videos. Oscillating between solid and liquid, minimalist and expressionist, pristine and abject, he alludes to rituals both mainstream and marginal, autobiography, and art history. Intellectually, frontiers interest him, from urban gang territories demarcated in graffiti to the charting of newly discovered stars and planets; in his work, Ruby tests formal limits, marking the edges of the canvas and limning the boundaries between creation, destruction, and renewal. In abstract paintings, acts of defacement evolve into a painterly sublime; while wood-burning stoves, ceramic basins containing shards of broken or misfired pottery, and soft sculptures resembling fanged jaws convey the raw potential of sculpture.

In the new YARD paintings at Gagosian Rue de Ponthieu, Ruby uses rollers and brooms to spread a soft palette of red, blue, green, and purple acrylic paints over unprimed canvases laid directly on the studio ground; incidental debris and textures beneath the canvas emerge as impressions during the frottage process. Fabric, cardboard, and other studio fragments are attached to the edges of each painting, like mysterious satellites at the borders of indeterminate topographies. Titles such as TCOM KUWAIT and DURAND LINE reference aerial military surveillance and conflict areas; others—ALPHA ANDROMEDAE, TIAMAT, PANGEA ULTIMA—are borrowed from constellations, ancient mythologies, and a potential supercontinent of the distant future.

At the Gagosian Le Bourget gallery are new sculptures made from hulking industrial parts sourced in the vicinity of Ruby’s Los Angeles studio. In these melancholic hybrids, Ruby combines huge fragments of a reclaimed American submarine with engine parts and steel pipes to create freestanding, battleship-gray abstractions that resemble drag cars, bulldozers, and plows. Titles such as HULL (VIPER) and DRAG (BANKER) hint at these transformations. These sculptures are interspersed with grounded soft sculptures entitled CANDLES: brightly colored, stuffed textiles manipulated to resemble overturned lit candlesticks. DEEP FLAGS are vast synthetic black fleeces stained with bleach; a rectangular fragment of the same material is attached to the upper left corner of each work, echoing the stars of the American flag. The speckled panels also evoke the fathomless depth of outer space, a sensation that ends abruptly at their striped elastic borders. Parsing the boundaries that divide, protect, isolate, and promote individual cultures, Ruby continues to evolve his dissonant formal reflection of contemporary reality.

The exhibitions are accompanied by a fully illustrated publication with an essay by critic and novelist Philippe Dagen.

Concurrent to these exhibitions the Musée de la Chasse et de la Nature will present Ruby’s monumental woodburning STOVES, installed in the central courtyard of the museum. A fully illustrated book documenting the production of the works will be published on the occasion.

Sterling Ruby was born on an American air force base in Bitburg, Germany in 1972, and lives and works in Los Angeles. Public collections include Museum of Modern Art, New York; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; Museum of Contemporary Art, North Miami; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Montreal Museum of Fine Arts; Tate, London; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; and Moderna Museet, Stockholm. Solo exhibitions include “CHRON,” The Drawing Center, New York (2008); “SUPERMAX 2008,” Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (2008); “Grid Ripper,” Galleria d’Arte Moderna e Contemporanea, Bergamo (2008–09); “SOFT WORK,” Centre D’Art Contemporain, Geneva (2012, traveled to FRAC Champagne-Ardenne, Reims; Bonniers Konsthall, Stockholm; and Museo d’Arte Contemporanea, Rome); “CHRON II,” Fondazione MEMMO, Rome (2013, traveled to Kunsthalle Mainz); “Droppa Blocka,” Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Ghent (2013); and “Sterling Ruby,” Baltimore Museum of Art (2014). In 2014, Ruby’s work was included in the Taipei Biennial, the Gwangju Biennial, and the Whitney Biennial. His work will be included in Art Public at Art Basel Miami Beach from December 2–6, 2015.

Lindbergh’s now-iconic photographs of women derive inspiration from early narrative cinema and street photography, in their fleeting observations and compositional elegance. His Eastern European heritage can be traced in the stark and guileless realism that frames the feminine beauty of his subjects.

In his editorial work for Vogue, Harper’s Bazaar, Interview, and many other international magazines, Lindbergh replaces staged, calculated glamour with a vérité approach, enhanced by his use of high-contrast black-and-white photography. He uses body movement, in particular modern dance, to celebrate the human form in a way that carries elements of both antiquity and modernity.

Spanning the last thirty years, the exhibition testifies to Lindbergh’s impact on the world of fashion photography, and his contribution to portraiture in general. The beauty of his female subjects is purposeful, self-possessed, and uninhibited. With little styling or setting to divert attention, Lindbergh’s approach emphasizes the raw physical grace of his subjects.

In a diptych of Monica Bellucci, one image holds her untamed and purposeful stare as she walks toward the camera, while in the other she looks away, apparently absorbed in a private moment far from the camera’s eye. In an homage to the late choreographer Pina Bausch, five models merge in an interlocking movement, their limbs and curves becoming elements of pure abstraction. In another photograph, Karen Elson’s pale stillness recalls classical stone statuary.

Peter Lindbergh was born in Lissa, Germany, in 1944. He lives and works between Paris, New York, and Arles, France. Public collections include Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Victoria and Albert Museum, London; and Centre national des arts plastiques (CNAP), Paris, among others. Solo exhibitions include “Peter Lindbergh: A Different History of Fashion,” Kunsthal Rotterdam, Netherlands (forthcoming 2016); “Peter Lindbergh: Images of Women,” Bunkamura Museum of Art, Tokyo (1996, traveled to Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin; and Kunsthaus Wien, Vienna in 1997; Palazzo Delle Esposizioni, Rome in 1998; Pushkin Museum of Fine Arts, Moscow, in 2002; and other locations); “Peter Lindbergh: Stories Supermodels,” Ludwig Museum Schloss, Oberhausen, Germany (2003); “Peter Lindbergh: The Unknown,” Ullens Center For Contemporary Art, Beijing (2011); “Peter Lindbergh,” FoMu, Antwerp (2011–12); and “Peter Lindbergh: Berlin,” Maison de la Photographie, Lille (2013).

Drawing has always been central to Baselitz's art. Parallel to his cerebral yet impassioned paintings and roughly hewn sculptures, the practice of drawing is a test-site for assimilation and disorientation in his oeuvre. In a new series of two-part ink drawings, Baselitz is "visited" by Katsushika Hokusai (1760–1849), whose exquisitely controlled color-woodblock prints epitomized the refined ukiyo-e genre in Japanese art and persist in the popular imagination today.

In each diptych, Baselitz pairs reconsidered motifs from his own work with iterations—in ink with blue, yellow or green watercolor washes—of an intimate late work by Hokusai, a wry self-portrait sketched at the end of a letter to his print publisher in 1842. The letter accompanied a group of prints made forty years earlier, which the Japanese master described to his publisher as repetitive, unresolved, and immature. He signed it with his pseudonym of the day: "Sincerely yours, the eighty-three year old Hachiemon."

The message of Hokusai's letter is that perfection comes with age and hindsight. Paired with his confidently drawn self-portrait as a mischievous old man, this poignant gesture from the elderly artist evidently provides inspiration across time and culture for Baselitz's own pursuit of newness and transformation while continuing to reflect on his own life and mortality.

The exhibition is accompanied by a fully illustrated publication with an essay by John-Paul Stonard.

Georg Baselitz was born in 1938 in Deutschbaselitz, Saxony, and lives and works between Ammersee, Germany; Basel, Switzerland; and Imperia, Italy. His work is included in public and private collections worldwide. Solo museum exhibitions include "Georg Baselitz," Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York (1995, traveled to Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.; and Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin); "Georg Baselitz: Aquarelles Monumentales," Albertina, Vienna (2003); "Georg Baselitz: A Retrospective," Royal Academy of Arts, London (2007, traveled to MADRE, Naples); "Baselitz auf Papier," Pinakothek der Moderne, Munich (2008); "Georg Baselitz: Folk Thing Zero," Galleria Borghese, Rome (2011); "Georg Baselitz: Pinturas Recentes," Pinacoteca, São Paulo (2010–11); "Baselitz as Sculptor," Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris (2011–12); "Georg Baselitz: Works from 1968 to 2012," Essl Museum, Vienna (2013); "Georg Baselitz: BDM Gruppe," Victoria and Albert Museum, London (2013); "Georg Baselitz: Remix," Albertina, Vienna (2013–14); and "Georg Baselitz-Back then, in between, and today," Haus der Kunst, Munich (2015). In 2014 the British Museum, London presented "Germany Divided: Baselitz and his Generation," an exhibition of drawings and prints by Baselitz, Markus Lüpertz, Blinky Palermo, A. R. Penck, Sigmar Polke, and Gerhard Richter.

In an oeuvre spanning more than forty years, Penone has explored the subtle levels of interplay between man, nature, and art. His work represents a poetic expansion of Arte Povera's radical break with conventional media, emphasizing the involuntary processes of respiration, growth, and aging that are common to both human being and tree.

In December 1968 Penone performed a series of formative acts, literally described, in a forest near his home in Garessio, Italy. In one, he interlaced the stems of three saplings in Ho intrecciato tre alberi/I have interwoven three trees; in another, Albero/filo di zinco/rame/Tree/wire of zinc/copper, he made the imprint of his hand in nails on the trunk of a tree and then affixed twenty-two pieces of lead (his age at the time), joined up with zinc and copper wire. In Crescendo innalzerà la rete/Growing it will raise the net he enclosed the top of a tree in a net weighed down with plants; while in L'albero ricorderà il contatto/The tree will remember the contact, he pressed his body to a tree, marking the points of contact with the trunk in barbed wire. In Continuerà a crescere tranne che in quel punto/It will continue to grow except at that point he intervened in the growth processes of a tree by inserting a steel cast of his own hand; over time the tree retained the memory of his gesture. In a stream he immersed a slab of cement of the dimensions of his body with the imprints of his hands, feet and face (La mia altezza, la lunghezza delle mie braccia, il mio spessore in un ruscello/My height, the length of my arms, my girth in a stream).

In the early 1970s, Penone continued to work with his own body by transcribing the textures of his skin and casting his face in plaster. For Turning One's Eyes Inside Out (1970), he was photographed wearing mirrored contact lenses, positing vision as the precise point of separation between self and environment. "The work of the poet," he wrote, "is to reflect like a mirror the visions that his sensibility has given him, to produce the sights, the images necessary to collective imaginings."

Engaging with, and subtly intervening in nature so as to reimagine it in artificial terms, Penone finds ever new ways to mark the persistence of biological life, harmonizing elemental occurrences in terms of his own artistic drive. In each work, he reveals the innate sculptural qualities of natural materials, chiseling marble and casting from nature to expose the deep patterns of growth and time.

In the current exhibition, Riflesso del bronzo/Reflection of bronze (2004) is a wall-mounted work in eight parts, where each dimly reflective, excoriated bronze plaque, successively cast from its immediate predecessor, is, literally, a mirror to time and process. The connection between act and contact, trace and imprint is further explored in Spine d'acacia—Contatto, aprile 2006/Acacia thorns—Contact, April 2006, where Penone painstakingly attached thousands of sharp thorns onto paneled canvas in sweeping whorls. At the center of the composition emerges the impression of a huge pair of lips, as if pressed directly on the canvas in visceral relation with nature.

The tree and its relationship to man is among Penone's most enduring subjects and a seemingly inexhaustible source of inspiration. A series of works Indistinti confini/Indistinct boundaries (2012), with their individual subtitles citing ancient Italian rivers, are bare tree trunks on pedestals, carved with astonishing veracity in ghostly white marble, into which Penone has embedded rusting iron nails and bronze knots. These metal elements eventually leach into and stain the marble, so the work appears to be, in a sense, "alive." Foglie di pietra/Leaves of stone (2013), from which the exhibition takes its title, is a series of sculptures in which tall splints of delicate cast bronze tree branches cradle found fragments of eighteenth-century ornamental stonework inspired by vegetal forms, a meditation on the endurance of nature beyond the passage of manmade culture and history.

Giuseppe Penone was born in 1947 in Garessio, Italy. He lives and works in Paris and Turin. Public collections include Tate Gallery, London; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Musée d´Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; MAXXI, Rome; Castello di Rivoli, Turin; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Museum of Modern Art, New York; and Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. Recent solo exhibitions include Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris (2004); Toyota Municipal Museum of Art, Toyota, Japan (2008); Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, United Kingdom (2009); "Des veines, au ciel, ouvertes," Musée des Arts Contemporains, Grand-Hornu, Belgium (2011); Documenta 13, Kassel (2012); "The Bloomberg Commission: Giuseppe Penone," Whitechapel Art Gallery, London (2012); "Penone Versailles," Château de Versailles, France (2013); Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland (2013); "Ideas of Stone (Idee di pietra)," Madison Square Park, New York (2013-14); and "Giuseppe Penone: Being the River, Repeating the Forest," Nasher Sculpture Center, Dallas (through January 10, 2016). Penone co-represented Italy in the 52nd Venice Biennale (2007). He was awarded the Praemium Imperiale by the Japan Art Association in 2014. Gravity and Growth, a major outdoor commission for the European Central Bank in Frankfurt, was completed in 2015 and he is currently working on a permanent commission for the Louvre Abu Dhabi in UAE. An exhibition of his work is planned at the Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam in 2016.

Marcel Broodthaers (Belgian, 1924–1976) worked primarily as a poet until the age of 40, when he turned to the visual arts. Over the next 12 years, his work retained a poetic quality and a sense of humor that balanced its conceptual framework; for his first solo exhibition, he encased unsold copies of his latest poetry book, Pense-Bête (Memory aid, 1964), in plaster, turning them into a sculpture. Broodthaers continued to invent ways to give material form to language while working across mediums—poetry, sculpture, painting, artist’s books, printmaking, and film. From 1968 to 1972, he operated the Musée d’Art Moderne, Département des Aigles (Museum of Modern Art, Department of Eagles), a traveling museum dedicated not to his work as an artist but to the role of the institution itself and the function of art in society. In the final years of his life, Broodthaers created immersive “décors,” large-scale displays in which examples of his past work were often unified with objects borrowed for the occasion. This exhibition—the first Broodthaers retrospective organized in New York—will reunite key works from all aspects of his art making to underscore the complex trajectory of his career, which despite its brief duration proved enormously influential to future generations of artists.

The exhibition will travel to Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía (MNCARS), Madrid, in October 2016, and to the Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen (KNW), Düsseldorf, in early 2017.
object-oriented ontology
In 1964, Jasper Johns wrote himself a note in his sketchbook: "Take an object / Do something to it / Do something else to it. [Repeat.]" Since then, art historians, artists, and critics have invoked this set of instructions on countless occasions to describe the revolutionary approaches to art making that developed in the late 1950s and early 1960s. This exhibition presents a selection of works from the Museum’s collection that all "take an object." Ranging in date from the mid-1950s to the 1970s, they reflect an interest shared by a generation of artists working around the world in deploying everyday objects and other non-fine art materials to make their work, from Johns and Robert Rauschenberg to Niki de Saint Phalle, Betye Saar, and Katsuhiro Yamaguchi. Lightbulbs, newspapers, chairs, and even taxidermied animals became new source materials to be painted on, covered over, affixed to, or surprisingly juxtaposed. Looking beyond traditional mediums such as oil paint and bronze, and beyond traditional formats such as easel paintings and cast sculptures, these artists posed a new set of conditions for art, whereby any and all parts of everyday life were fair game.

Titled “The Future Was,” the 2016 Global Art Forum explores the ways in which artists, writers, technologists, historians, musicians and thinkers have imagined—and are shaping—the future, with its customary series of live talks, panels, performances and commissioned projects.

The diverse roster of contributors participating in the March programme includes, among others, curators Glenn Lowry (director of New York’s Museum of Modern Art), Prada Foundation director Germano Celant, the Serpentine’s Hans Ulrich Obrist and João Ribas of the Serralves Museum of Contemporary Art; artists Christine Sun Kim, Sophia Al Maria, Monira Al Qadiri, eL Seed, Hito Steyerl and Francesco Vezzoli; Emirati science fiction writers Noura Al Noman and Mohammad Al Hammadi.

Taking place on Madinat Jumeirah‘s newly expanded Fort Island during Art Dubai, the Global Art Forum’s March series of live talks examines subjects as various as how museums and artists are working with “the future of the past”; why deserts are the typical landscapes of fictional futures; the archaeology of space; the relationship between the futures and art markets; Brazilian architect Oscar Niemeyer’s forgotten masterplan for Dubai; our relationship with technology and the cloud; and much more.
object-oriented ontology
“The future isn’t what it used to be, which is why the tenth edition of the Global Art Forum is called ‘The Future Was’,” said Commissioner Shumon Basar. “How did different parts of the world imagine their future fates? Technologically? Culturally? Creatively? Ideas can be time machines—so we’re inviting some of the brightest minds to share their ideas and take us backwards and forwards through time and place.”

Artists play a particular role in the tenth Global Art Forum, and the programme features new commissions, including short films by Qatari writer and artist Sophia Al Maria that speculate on the future of our environment, and a new performance work by Monira Al Qadiri dwelling on the role of oil in all of our futures.

A further new Global Art Forum commission sees the UAE collective WTD reproduce a slideshow of real estate advertisements from Dubai in 2006–7, when Art Dubai and the Global Art Forum began. Christine Sun Kim will present a special performance, while artist eL Seed discusses his new project, exploring the topic of perception in Cairo’s Zabaleen community, with MoMA Director Glenn D. Lowry. 

Other contributors, illustrative of the Forum’s typical eclecticism and its capacity to take a “helicopter view” of the arts, include the economist (and co-founder of ITO 33) Elie Ayache giving a talk on “The Future Was The Market”; urbanists and Brownbook founders Ahmed and Rashid bin Shabib; space archaeologist Alice Gorman; writer Sohrab Mahdavi; plus the award-winning South African novelist Lauren Beukes.

The 2016 Global Art Forum launched in January with heavily over-subscribed events at Dubai Design District (d3) and in London in partnership with the Institute of Contemporary Arts (ICA), with 16 speakers—from the Emirati scientists leading the UAE 2020 mission to Mars, to renowned artist John Gerrard, and musicians Hasan Hujairi and André Vida.
object-oriented ontology
Temple Bar Gallery + Studios is pleased to announce the line-up for its 2016 exhibition programme. This year, the gallery will present five exhibitions with work by eight different artists, starting with Imitation of Life the first solo exhibition in Ireland of the American artist Amie Siegel.

This exhibition, guest curated by Megs Morley, brings together two of Siegel’s recent film works that both delve into the world of architectural construction and luxury real estate to expose uncanny relationships between art, labour and value.

In her recent work Quarry (2015) Siegel traces the source of marble from a dark, cave-like underground quarry in Vermont to its high-end destination in Manhattan real estate developments. The orchestral soundtrack forms an emotive underpinning to the sleek interiors, echoing at times the aspiration of the luxury rendering. White marble, with its association to classical renaissance sculpture, is shaped and constructed into the interior surfaces of these luxury apartments, designed to bring even the most mundane spaces in closer proximity to the materiality and values of art.

In The Architects (2014) the ceaseless tracking of the camera slices transversally through the city of New York, moving through various architecture studios, creating a seamless timeline that merge spaces and times. The camera takes in vast office spaces and gazes uncompromisingly at the highly networked production of global architecture. Our view into this world is obscured by surfaces and layers of representation; facades, paintings, models, screens, windows—the very architectures of looking and seeing.

Exhibited together for the first time, these works underline Siegel’s distinctive tracking shots and sudden tableaux, to reveal and montage increasingly elaborate layers and strategies of re-creation and simulation. Ultimately the representation of living or “life” exposes a complex economy of production and speculation.

Amie Siegel (b. 1974, Chicago) works variously in photography, video, film installation, performance and feature films for the cinema. Her work has been the subject of recent solo exhibitions including Amie Siegel: Provenance at The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York and Amie Siegel. Part 2: Ricochet at Kunstmuseum Stuttgart. The artist has participated in group exhibitions at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Hayward Gallery, London; CCA Wattis, San Francisco; MoMA PS1, New York; MAXXI Museum, Rome; Kunst-Werke, Berlin; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; as well as TULCA 2011, Galway, and, currently, Everything Must Go at the Lewis Glucksman Gallery, Cork, Ireland. Her films have screened at the Cannes, Berlin, Toronto and New York Film Festivals, The Museum of Modern Art, New York and The National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C. Her work is in public and private collections including the Whitney Museum of American Art, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, Tate Modern and the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum. She has been a fellow of the DAAD Berliner-Kunstlerprogramm and the Guggenheim Foundation, a recipient of the ICA Boston’s Foster Prize, a 2012 Sundance Institute award, the 2014 Forum Expanded award at the Berlin Film Festival and a 2015 Creative Capital Award.

In February 2016, the Philadelphia Museum of Art will present International Pop, a groundbreaking survey of this important movement that explores Pop Art as a global phenomenon that was shaped by artists working in many different countries throughout the world. The exhibition features paintings, sculpture, assemblage, installation, printmaking, and film by eighty artists, drawn from public and private collections around the world, and offers an intriguing new look at a subject that is familiar. Viewing Pop Art through a much wider lens that amplifies a history commonly associated with major American figures like Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein, it is sure to delight audiences and broaden their understanding of one of the most significant chapters in the history of contemporary art. Organized by the Walker Art Center, this is the first traveling exhibition in the United States to present a comprehensive account of the development of Pop Art during the 1960s and 1970s. The Philadelphia Museum of Art will be its final venue and the only East Coast presentation.
object-oriented ontology
Timothy Rub, the George D. Widener Director and CEO of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, stated: “Pop was one of the most iconic art movements of the second half of the twentieth century. This exhibition is an ambitious effort to explore its emergence and impact far beyond the borders of the United States and Britain. We are delighted that in Philadelphia we will add to the exhibition some important works from private collections and our own holdings of contemporary art.”

Emerging first in the United Kingdom and the United States, Pop Art soon become an international phenomenon, finding expression in a bewildering variety of different forms and media. It was a product of a revolutionary social and political era as well as a response to the proliferation of consumer culture in the decades after World War II and the media—magazines, television, and motion pictures—that fueled its growth. The exhibition will give visitors a rare opportunity to see Pop Art in a new light. It will examine the factors that shaped artistic activity in the social democracies of Europe, the military regimes of Latin America, and Japan in the aftermath of U.S. occupation. It will include sections closely examining vital hubs of Pop activity in Great Britain, Brazil, Argentina, Germany, the United States, and Japan. International Pop will also bring together works from diverse geographic regions and different periods during the development of the movement to explore common themes and subjects.

For over ten years, Belgian artist Vincent Meessen (b. 1971 in Baltimore, USA) has been exploring the multiple and contested faces of Western modernity. By revisiting forgotten or overlooked episodes of our colonial past, Meessen exposes the blind spots that inevitably accompany a Eurocentric account of history. His practice demonstrates a commitment to interdisciplinary collaboration and agency beyond the borders of art. In this light, he has recently been mining the influential heritage of the Situationist International, which upset so radically the relations between culture, politics and everyday life. While drawn to the Situationist International, Meessen is critical of its mythology, not least the consecration of Guy Debord as its hero and Paris as its epicentre. 

Sire, je suis de l’ôtre pays, Meessen’s largest solo exhibition to date, incorporates media that range from the moving image and its display structures to typography, together with rare situationist documents. For this presentation, the artist has created an expanded spatial setting for the filmic installation One.Two.Three. Co-produced by WIELS, this work was originally created for the Belgian Pavilion at the 2015 Venice Biennial and is shown here for the first time in Belgium. Structured around a protest song composed in May 1968 by Congolese situationist M’Belolo Ya M’Piku, rediscovered by Meessen in the archives of Belgian situationist Raoul Vaneigem, the film reveals hitherto unknown artistic and intellectual exchanges between the Situationist International and the Congo.

The exhibition takes its title from Ivan Chtcheglov’s 1953 manifesto “Formulary for a New Urbanism.” Following the situationists’ plan to construct an experimental city on an uninhabited island, Meessen has built an ambitious sculptural installation in the form of a labyrinth. Titled SIISIS, Meessen’s labyrinth is neither a monument nor an attraction, but a site that compels the visitor to drift under conditions of constraint. By means of this physical confrontation, Meessen invites the viewer to reflect on how a notion of citizenship could be implemented that—contrary to the current state of affairs—is not based on establishing roots but on circulation. 


I Must First Apologize… is the culmination of a major project by Joana Hadjithomas and Khalil Joreige, an exhibit featuring an extensive body of work in film, sculpture, photography, and installation looking at the history of online spam and scamming. The artists have collected and archived more than 4,000 scams, a certain kind of spam email since 1999. Written in the first person and structured like monologues, the scam messages often usurp famous individuals’ identities, with the writers posing as the children or wives of politicians, or as notorious dictators claiming to possess a large sum of money they need to transfer urgently. These scams are based on a plausible reality, rooted in news or real events, often referring to present-time conflicts and with the aim to exploit people’s gullibility.

Founded on historical confidence tricks such as The Jerusalem Letter, which dates back to the eighteenth century, these frauds have been surprisingly efficient; thousands of people are conned every year, with tragic results. Collectively these email scams delineate a map of recent geopolitical conflict, social unrest, and economic upheaval. The exhibition charts a kind of narrative itinerary ranging from various works that present intimate correspondence between scammers and victims, and several video works that feature real or fictional protagonists of scams.

Among the works in the exhibition, The Rumor of the World, 2014, is an immersive environment where non-professional actors of various backgrounds recite email scams and stories directly to the viewer from 13 video screens and over 37 loudspeakers. Their chorus of voices evokes the saturation of the online world while blurring the distinction between truth and fiction. Geometry of Space, 2014, is a series of sculptures and drawings that track the virtual network and geographic circulation of hundreds of scam emails creating an alternative history of the contemporary world. The Trophy Room, 2014, highlights the intimate correspondence between scammers and so-called scam-baiters, whose objective is to scam the scammers themselves, by tricking them into performing bizarre and humiliating acts. The resulting collection of “trophies” (videos, photographs, paintings, sculptures, performances) fades the distinction between victim and scammer. The multi-channel video installation, It’s all Real, 2014 gives a voice to some of the non-professional actors appearing in The Rumor of the World.  Most of them are immigrants, whose personal accounts reflect the tales of economic woe and exile, often appearing as incredible as those described in the scams.  
object-oriented ontology
I Must First Apologize… acts as a narrative itinerary and a cinematographic exhibition. Throughout this body of work, Hadjithomas and Joreige probe into the structures of belief and storytelling. They unfold a complex set of relationships marked by intimacy, trust, faith, greed, and desire, all in relation to the internet and technology.

Joana Hadjithomas and Khalil Joreige (both b. 1969, Beirut, Lebanon) live and work in Beirut and Paris. They have collaborated as filmmakers and artists since 1997. They have made award-winning films such as A Perfect Day, Je Veux Voir (I Want to See), and The Lebanese Rocket Society, which have been shown all over the world. Their photographs and installations have been exhibited in solo and group exhibitions at Centre Pompidou, Paris; Musée d’Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; Victoria & Albert Museum, London; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; the New Museum, New York; and Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; as well as numerous biennal exhibitions, including the Venice Biennale in 2015.

HACKING HABITAT. ART OF CONTROL is an international exhibition on the cutting edge of art, technology and social change. 86 internationally acclaimed artists present new and existing work in the former prison at Utrecht Wolvenplein, Netherlands. With Lawrence Abu Hamdan (Jordan), Forensic Architecture (UK), Melanie Bonajo (Netherlands), James Bridle (UK), Felix Burger (Germany), Cristina Lucas (Spain), Centre for Political Beauty (Germany), Johan Grimonprez (Belgium), Susan Hiller (USA), Samson Kambalu (Malawi), William Kentridge (South Africa), Laura Kurgan (USA), Metahaven (Netherlands), Pedro Reyes (Mexico), Stanza (GB), Fernando Sanchez Castillo (Spain), and many others.

 

HACKING HABITAT presents a highly topical and urgent theme: how we are controlled by high-tech systems and how to restore the relationship between humans and machines. Surveillance cameras observe us, inimitable Google algorithms manipulate our behaviour, our smart phones cast a collective hypnotic spell on us. We risk losing control over our lives to powerful economic and technological institutions. Worldwide, people are waking up to the fact that they need to regain a grip on their lives. Together they give rise to powerful forces of resistance and reclaim their living environment.

High-tech systems and institutions take charge. Smartphones have become the new panopticon with data combinations that establish your identity more exactly than a fingerprint. Surveillance camera’s are hidden in thermostats and are soon to be found in everyday packaging material functioning as hightech listening devices. Algorithms control not only financial transactions but also decide on our digital citizenship. High time to claim back our environment—to hack our habitat.

HACKING HABITAT contributes to a heightened sense of ‘a-whereness’ as a condition to survive in these liquid times of velvet dictatorships. Three filters are presented: Data & Surveillance, Finance & its Logics and Destructive Forces. Throughout the exhibition the violence of predatory systems builds up while the many counterstrikes meander through the prison spaces. The visitor is drown into a dizzying science fiction real time. Artists, hackers, activists and groups of concern make remote control society tangible and show how to use high- and low-technology to our advantage.

MACK. Just Light and Colour, made possible with the main sponsorship of Tahincioğlu, focuses on the significant oeuvre of German artist Heinz Mack, who is notably among the founders of the mid-20th century avant-garde art network, the ZERO movement. The exhibition, encompassing the artist’s formative earlier works that informed the revolutionary philosophy of the ZERO movement, which were followed by extensive explorations into the realm of Land Art, brings together paintings, monumental sculptures and kinetic works produced throughout the artist’s career. Among the exhibited works are open-air installations Mack designed during his artistic explorations in the Sahara Desert regarding light and colour in nature, reliefs and sculptures produced in a myriad of materials, as well as the artist’s large canvases titled “Chromatic Constellations,” drawings and pastels.

Heinz Mack’s timeless works delineating the many facets of light and colour will be open to visit February 18 through July 17, 2016 at Sakıp Sabancı Museum galleries, with an artist talk taking place in the attendance of Heinz Mack and noted art critic and curator Beral Madra on the opening day of the exhibition, February 18. Heinz Mack’s first solo exhibition in Istanbul, where the civilisations of East and West have bequeathed a priceless heritage over thousands of years, will be accompanied by a rich program of conferences, education programs, workshops, as well as a comprehensive exhibition catalogue suitable for both scholars and the general public.

Born in Vancouver in 1975 and a graduate of Concordia University in Montreal and Goldsmiths, University of London, Larissa Fassler has lived and worked in Berlin since 1999. She is interested in the subjective dimension of urban flows, of individual itineraries and solitary routes that constitute the invisible background of the mass statistics in which humanity is inevitably reduced to numerical data. Fassler compiles observations of people, signs, lanes of traffic; she reveals the tensions and dysfunctions as well as the energies crossing parts of the urban space with a high symbolic charge (political, economic and social): Regent Street in London; Place de la Concorde and Les Halles in Paris; Alexanderplatz in Berlin and Kotti, in the Kreuzberg district, one of the most multicultural places in the German capital, mainly inhabited by the Turkish community; to Taksim Square in Istanbul, visited in the spring of 2015. 

The exhibition Extracts explores a collection of works produced over the last ten years. It features drawings, prints, notebooks and models giving a striking new view of public places and a sensitive interpretation of the most current urban issues.

Parc Saint Léger is delighted to present a solo show with the artist Eva Koťátková. The show offers a look back through her work with a display of both old works and pieces that are being shown for the first time, extending a particular corpus called “Theater of Speaking Objects.”

Through her installations, drawings, videos, and performances, Eva Koťátková explores a form of mediation between man and the world, and the processes of subjectivization vis-à-vis her objects and installations. Like her exhibitions, the artist’s installations always have a narrative character. Yet her narrative never develops linearly; rather, it is fragmented, broken up, or interrupted, underscoring in this way the difficulties of communication. She develops her constructs in such a way as to suggest that ideas, thoughts, and emotions can only be formulated indirectly.

At first the artist, interested in the different educational models that are spread throughout all societies, sampled images in historical books on education. Her iconography draws its inspiration from a number of sources, including the practices of Moritz Schreber (1808–61), the German physician, teacher, and orthopedist, who equipped his clinic with the most sophisticated mechanisms of the day. These objects, falling somewhere between a prosthesis and an instrument of torture, are so many representations for expressing security, control, and constraint, and so many metaphors for denouncing the normative measures of the social context.

Inspired by this iconography, Eva Koťátková produces drawings, collages, and objects that are often akin to grids, cages, or traps for the body. By lending them an anthropomorphic character, she makes her objects a support for voices or ideas which could not be expressed otherwise. She is also shifting her experiments increasingly in the direction of a body language, viewed as a true means of communication. Thus, her installations deliberately play with theater and its conventions. The different elements on display are like accessories waiting to be activated, either by a performer or in the mind of the viewer, who becomes actively involved in the show.
object-oriented ontology
While Eva Koťátková’s theater maintains ties with literature, it also explores its therapeutic and political counterpart. Her experiments summon such figures as Jacob Levy Moreno (1889–1974), the inventor of psychodrama and one of the pioneers of group therapy, and Augusto Boal (1931–2009), the Brazilian writer, playwright, stage director, and politician. Both men were interested in improvisation and the exploration of emotions and critical thinking through role play and situations that examine the connections between individuals and interpersonal relationships. These two figures also have in common the fact that they gave a voice to the marginal, the impaired, and the oppressed. Continuing along the same lines, Eva Koťátková has introduced into her installations and objects faint or loud voices which often deal with the theme of dysfunctional interpersonal connections or altered communication.

As in Surrealist collage or films, Eva Koťátková’s theater summons elements of rational thought and the unconscious, where phenomena of uncertain origins and real things are found side by side. Her work remains in disuse, on hold; it conceals more than it reveals by employing allusion and secret code. And in this way it leaves all the room the invisible and the subconscious need.

What does life consist of? This question is at the heart of Moderna Museet’s major group exhibition this spring. Despite countless attempts of scientists and philosophers, no one seems to have come up with a satisfactory definition, not even with the aid of today’s advanced theories on complex systems. On the contrary, the astounding potential of synthetic biology has, if anything, added to the sense of uncertainty. The exhibition Life Itself is an attempt to approach this question through art—if only to confront our inability to find satisfactory answers.

Anyone undertaking a study of the concept of “life” in our culture will soon find that life has no definition, writes the Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben in L’aperto. L’uomo e l’animale (The Open: Man and Animal, 2002). Instead, this indeterminate thing—life itself—has been articulated and divided over and over again, through a series of oppositions that endow it with a purpose in science, philosophy and politics, without ever actually being defined as such. It seems increasingly clear that nothing is obvious when it comes to life itself.

“A starting point for the exhibition is the growing uncertainty about the boundaries of life. This bewilderment around the nature of life has only increased in our technologically altered environments, entirely permeated with artificial components behaving as though given by nature. As in the installation GreenScreenRefrigeratorAction, in which Mark Leckey gives voice to a ‘smart fridge,’ scrutinizing how the high-tech objects around us are ever more distinctly modelled on ourselves,” says Jo Widoff.

Many of the works in Life Itself are distinguished by a recurrent desire to delve more deeply into everything that surrounds us, revealing how that which is alive is perhaps not fully so—and vice versa. This prompts us to consider whether it is meaningful to make such distinctions in the first place. No doubt similar motivations can be found in some of today’s most speculative theoretical approaches, not least in those new forms of materialism that attempt to rid our thinking of the obsession with the historically overemphasized relationship between a perceiving subject and a known object. Instead, these theorists claim, we should explore other equally productive relationships between human and non-human agents—be they technical or biological.

Carsten Höller comments on the selected artists:
“Our choice of such disparate works from the last one hundred years was made with the purpose of exploring the potential of art to express the astonishment we feel when confronted with the question of what life really is. At the same time, we get a hint that the reason why we cannot grasp life is either because the methods at our disposal today (including art) are insufficient, or simply that we are not supposed to understand, since the consequences would be profound and deeply disturbing.” 

“My work is my body, my body is my work” 

Through drawing, painting, photography and video, Helena Almeida (born Lisbon, 1934), calls into the question traditional disciplines, constantly seeking to transgress the limits of the canvas or the sheet of paper in order to create “habitable spaces” in which reality and representation intersect. In her works, her body, which is both subject and support, encounters and manipulates the surrounding world. As the site of both political and personal expression, it acts, touches, senses and marks, leaving behind it moving traces. Titled Corpus, the Jeu de Paume’s retrospective presents, for the first time in France, a group of works that are emblematic of this major figure of contemporary Portuguese art, spanning the 1960s to the present day. 

The event will be broadcast live here.

Superconversations: Machines that Matter brings together a range of thinkers and artists concerned with the intersection of technology and immanence, questioning the logic of vitalism while developing that of mechanism. The symposium builds upon several themes from e-flux’s Supercommunity / Superconversations project for the 56th Venice Biennale and forms the final installment of The New Centre’s Symposia 2015, a planetary series of in-person and simulcast video conversations that began in Graz and Melbourne in July and August.

The New Art panel concerns the status of art in the era of computation. If aesthetics has historically been defined in terms of the binary of techne and poiesis, what might a machinic art that takes the third step of deploying poises through techne look like? The implications of such a rethinking will address the extension and revision of the human via modes of virtuality as a form of collective imagination. The panel seeks a synthesis of prior theories of the relationship between art and technology, paving the way for new interventions.

The Science Fiction panel concerns the question of transgalactic emancipation as presented in the form and content of science fiction film, literature, and music. It examines collectivity in the era of interplanetary computation, departing from prior pieties of terrestriality and embodiment, with broad implications for the inhuman whole. Rather than beginning from the ubiquity of life, the panel focuses on science fiction that begins from the ubiquity of machines, heralding new possibilities for collective transformation that are irreducible to the social yet inseparable from the political.

The Computation panel concerns pan-computationalism, according to which, “if the laws of the universe can be reduced to binary code, there might be no actual difference between the universe and the computer,” and critical computationalism, in which intelligent machines are descendants of the long trajectory of inhuman prostheses which revise and extend the human beyond its biophenomenological substrate. Examining the emergence of artificial intelligence, the panel engages the process through which multiple, overlapping measurements result in ever more robust virtualizations.

“Supercommunity Live” brings together editors and contributors to e-flux journal‘s expansive four-month publishing project for the 2015 Venice Biennale. Together, the 88 days of contributions to Supercommunity testify to a profound shift in the status of humanity in relation to the planet.

Unstable market forces, the consequences of colonialism, and changes in the Earth’s biosphere have combined to undermine and even invert the border between human and nature that the modern period sought to order and stabilize, often with extreme violence. Today, the resulting crisis in the very idea of what constitutes humanity and nature as distinct entities is only further provoked by economic and political events that don’t seem to be reducible to the command of either one. The vast scale of these shifts calls for an equally expansive community of thinkers to be assembled just to begin to identify the shape of the problem through guest-edited sections on the universality of corruption, the many faces of apocalypse, the materialist metaphysics of the cosmos, the universe as a gigantic computer, and other themes.

On October 30 and 31, e-flux will present “Supercommunity Live: The Climatic Unconscious,“ together with Remai Modern Art Gallery of Saskatchewan. Join e-flux journal editors Julieta Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood, and Anton Vidokle and special guests Kader Attia, Raymond Boisjoly, Natasha Ginwala, Wietske Maas, Pedro Neves Marques, Matteo Pasquinelli, Elizabeth Povinelli, and Mohammad Salemy for two days full of lectures and discussions at the Roxy Theatre in Saskatoon, with screenings of works by Hito Steyerl, Julieta Aranda, Elizabeth Povinelli, Anton Vidokle, Hassan Khan, Susanne Winterling, and others.

For the full program and to register to attend, click here. Admission is free for University of Saskatchewan students. 

A specific notion of humanity must now be filled in with what it could not fully expel in the past: indigenous worlds, natural and supernatural forces, divinatory financial and political futures, the discreet charm and persistent sociability of capital, and the autonomous will of technological extensions producing new natures that no longer answer to the humans who wrote the software. If today’s contemporary art often seems a confusing and overextended mess, it may very well be because it is already confronting this emerging reality from within its very center. It is paradoxical that these questions can be addressed in their full scope in this setting, precisely due to art’s place at the very center of the humanist tradition. But maybe not so paradoxical: as many members of the Supercommunity have pointed out, the merging and confusing of humanity with its ecological or planetary other is not only leading to the mutual eradication of humanity and the end of the world. It is also leading to a profound enhancement and advancement in the understanding of what constitutes human life.

Changes in our planet’s biosphere are no longer only about climate. They now draw into their orbit an entire range of abstract forces previously thought to serve humanity by protecting it from its outside. Today, the climatic unconscious may hold the key to unlocking the contradictions of a planet that became unfamiliar and inhospitable when it was globalized. Because climate conditions hold people together when nothing else does, on glorious days and in apocalyptic floods.


object-oriented ontology
Silent Revolt at the National Museum, Oslo
Inghild Karlsen, Pustende ballong, 1988–89. Courtesy of the artist.
Silent Revolt
Norwegian process art and conceptual art in the ’70s and ’80s 
object-oriented ontology
March 4–September 18, 2016
National Museum of Norway 
Bankplassen 4 
0151 Oslo
Norway
www.nasjonalmuseet.no 
Facebook
 PrivacyBadger has replaced this AddThis button.
Towards the end of the 1960s, conceptual art emerged as a new radical art movement on the international art scene. In the writing of Norwegian art history, conceptual art has been conspicuously missing, however, and the movement has never been presented in exhibitions of any great scope. With Silent Revolt the museum aims to reassess the view of conceptual art as a vacuum in our recent history. The exhibition sheds light on the Norwegian pioneers who in the 1970s and ’80s challenged the status of the work of art both as aesthetic object and commodity, and who with their silent revolt paved the way for today’s artistic practices.

The exhibition features works by the artists Viggo Andersen, Ingrid Book, Paul Brand, Bård Breivik, Oddvar I.N. Darén, Carina Hedén, Marianne Heske, Inghild Karlsen, Terje Munthe, Lars Paalgard, Bente Stokke, Audun Sørsdal and Gerd Tinglum. 

The works include a great range of mediums—from photographs and video works that document land art, via interventions, performances, graphic art and photomontages, to large sculptural works. Among the works presented in the exhibition is a reconstruction of an installation of mouldy bread that Bård Breivik created for his debut exhibition in 1974, and a large breathing balloon made of felt and nearly four metres in diameter, employed by Inghild Karlsen in 1989 as a protest action against oil drilling in Northern Norway. Many of the works have never been shown to a large public before.
object-oriented ontology
Conceptual art has been described as a revisionist impulse that was directed at the entire art institution. The aim was not only to change the art object, but also the gallery system, social norms, art criticism and art theory. The timing for a radical transformation of Norwegian art was far from ideal, however: the 1970s was in many ways marked by aesthetic conformity, isolationism and political activism. The result was that Norwegian artists who worked with idea-based and dematerialised art rarely gained access to galleries or museums. The art critics did not exactly receive them with open arms either: their works were met with everything from headlines like “Debris that is called art,” to widespread indifference.

Despite its invisibility, Norwegian conceptual art represented a significant turning point in Norwegian art history: the movement introduced new artistic genres such as documentary photography, video art and readymades. The fact that many of the artists ended up as professors at the art academies contributed to reforming Norway’s art education, from a conservative, object-oriented modus to a more idea and process-based teaching method.

A puppet theater resembles the human world, in miniature, with the one difference: its actors are small, animated objects. Puppets often remind us of the way we were as children and, indeed, the word “puppet” comes from “poppet,” an English term of endearment for a child. The little actors are like shells, they belong to anyone who knows how to make a character out of them. They have been known to become our agents in the world of grown-ups. They can be sharp-tongued, making grandiose speeches about politics, and they embody our inner voices and the weaknesses we want to conceal. Since they are in a way immortal, puppets can perform in scenes that are too daredevil for humans. They make us laugh. They often turn into animal figures, sometimes they become giants or naturalistic dolls, which look almost exactly like humans. Interacting with them can give us an anxious or uncanny feeling.
object-oriented ontology
The Objects Do Things project appeals to the pleasure we get from engaging with the world of the imagination. It is shaped by the changes that have taken place in the visual arts in the past few years: the appearance of very many narrative and fictional threads and the unstoppable need to tell stories. It also uses the distinctive aesthetic that in popular culture brings to mind children’s theater and television programs. By contrast, the tradition of the puppet theater has deep roots in the history of the European avant-garde and the early days of performance art, especially Bauhaus, Surrealist, and Dada experiments.

This project came about at the point where theater and the visual arts meet, with fictional characters created by artists. Connecting the exhibition’s scenographic quality with live theatrical acts is an important innovation of the project. What happens when the theater in its most traditional form interacts with the art world, and who are the characters of this exhibition? What traits does a character need to possess for the public to want to identify with her? Empathy helps a human community survive, but when do emotions develop towards inanimate objects? How far can empathy go in the world of things?

The project puts “things” at the center of the study. It shows how objects can exist and interact in the artistic world and how this can refer to human existence. This is one of the key challenges of object-oriented ontology, with its commitment to realism and the belief that objects exist independently of the human mind. The characters brought into existence by artists have the ability to speak; rather extraordinarily, they activate stories contained in the exhibition space. Puppets become tools to actuate memories, and at the same time introduce narrative as part of the project.

The exhibition will host a film program, a performance program, and a puppet slam—a cabaret whose actors will include puppets. We will put on sketches conceived by visual artists and expert puppeteers. Stand-up comedy improvisations, karaoke jokes, and many other attractions will take place on a specially constructed stage set in the theater space of the Center for Contemporary Art Ujazdowski Castle.

object-oriented ontology
Bjorn Melhus:  Eastern_Western_Park
December 19, 2005
Bjorn Melhus: Eastern_Western_Park
Honolulu Academy of Arts
Bjoern Melhus (1966-)
Still from Eastern_Western_Park
Contemporary Masters @
Honolulu Academy of Arts Bjorn Melhus: Eastern_Western_Park
Honolulu Academy of Arts
900 South Beretania Street
Honolulu, Hawaii 96814-1495
Telephone: (808) 532-8700
Facsimile: (808) 532-8787
www.honoluluacademy.org
 PrivacyBadger has replaced this AddThis button.
The Honolulu Academy of Arts will present Bjorn Melhus: Eastern_ Western_Park December 21, 2005 through January 22, 2006 in the Claire Boothe Luce Gallery.

Born in Kirchheim/Tech in southwestern Germany in 1966, Melhus has worked and studied in both Europe and the United States. The Academys presentation of his major video installation, Eastern_Western_Park, is the second exhibition in a new series of works by contemporary masters, which began earlier this year with an exhibition of paintings by Neo Rauch.
Eastern_Western_Park is built conceptually on two sets of stereotypes prevalent in the Western world. The first comprises classic and often thoroughly misunderstood images of Native Americans and cowboys of the Old West, as presented through the best-selling popular novels of the German author Karl May (1842-1912). His stories, which were later serialized on German television, were based on a combination of propagandistic views of the American West and his own imagination. Significantly, May never actually visited the American West, yet his stories were hugely popular and are still published, including in English translation.
object-oriented ontology
Superimposed on this are equally stereotypical and ambiguous images of the Japanese schoolgirl. Significantly, these images are generated primarily in Japan, yet have taken hold in the Western mind as well. As Melhus himself admits, his interpretation of such images are solely based on imagination and media influences. As such, the video installation Eastern_Western_Park plays on two coexisting sets of imaginary perceptions, simultaneously widespread and naive. The entire installation is a vivid commentary on the degree to which many of our views of the world are informed by nonsense, with all the reality of a theme park.

Melhuss exhibitions are known for their rapid assault of images, washes of color, and barrages of audio snippets, often using multiple video monitors and projectors to accomplish exciting and provocative multi-media installations. Melhus has exhibited his work at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, Long Beach Museum of Art, Whitney Museum of American Art, and a variety of museums in Europe and Japan.

Melhus installation is accompanied by a limited edition artists book documenting the work Eastern_Western_Park .

Are the lights on or off?
Is the water off?
Are the cigarettes out?
Is the back door closed?
Is the elevator working?
Is there anyone in the lobby?
Whos that sitting in my lap?

MiArt 2006 is kicking off its new guest country program by inviting a select group of galleries from the Chinese Peoples Republic. The eleventh Milan-based art fair has decided to shine the spotlight on Chinese art, which is currently arousing so much critical curiosity, as well as widespread interest among the public at large.

Besides hosting these galleries, MiArt is also staging a round table discussion on 1 April entitled Cina Intra/Extra Ovest (China Intra/Extra West), with a panel featuring influential artists, curators and collectors who live and work in both China and the West. The coordinator is Hans Ulrich Obrist and the agenda will touch on issues ranging from the fast-moving scenario of contemporary Chinese art to the processes and changes taking place in that countrys art market, with a view to forging stronger ties with the international art scene.
object-oriented ontology
Though many are complaining about the Italian market being sluggish and short of ideas, the Milanese art scene is burgeoning, with countless new spaces opening up and many old ones expanding. Accordingly, together with the Italian and foreign exhibitors selected for previous editions who have confirmed their attendance again next year, numerous prestigious newcomers have also signed up for MiArt 2006.

Much of the credit for this early success is due to the uncompromising attitude of the Review Board, whose members are Claudia Gian Ferrari, Claudio Guenzani, Matteo Lorenzelli, Massimo Mininni, Marco Niccoli, and Carla Pellegrini Rocca. The Board has adopted a Code of Ethics, available on the MiArt website (www.miart.it) , which ensures the utmost transparency of the selection procedures and criteria for examining the plans submitted for approval by candidate galleries.

In particular, the Anteprima section, open only to artists under the age of 35, will for the first time be welcoming the Bologna-based gallery Neon, which recently also opened a space in Milan, NO gallery, Federico Luger, Unorossodue, Alessandro De March and Artopia. Anteprima 2006 will also be inaugurating a new section entitled Video at MiArt featuring video installations; it will be curated by Olivia Spatola and include 16 solo exhibits presented by 16 invited Italian and international galleries.

The highly select Modern art section will include a limited number of approved Italian exhibitors, along with Galerie 1900-2000, now a regular fixture at MiArt, the Spanish Barbiè gallery and Thessa Herold from Paris.

In 2005, the contemporary art section stole the show with its giant sized works, comfortably accommodated in 4 meter tall stands. Next years entries confirm the trend: classic art works from the past few decades will stand shoulder to shoulder with numerous photographic works by Italian and international photographers. A large number of acclaimed names from across the world have chosen to exhibit at MiArt, from Monika Sprueth and Philomene Magers to Ben Brown, and from Artiscope to Modern Culture and Paul Stolper.

No amount of effort is being spared to finalize a long list of conferences, round table discussions and partnerships with public and private organizations, the aim being to boost Milans energy level during MiArt, and turn the Lombardy regions capital city into a wellspring of contemporary art capable of satisfying the demands of the international collectors and curators who are expected to throng to the fair.

Kiosk is a travelling archive of independent publishing projects within the field of contemporary art. With contributions from more than 250 alternative and self-organised publishing houses, Kiosk comprises a diverse and illuminating range of artists books, periodicals, alternative magazines and audio and video projects. First presented in 2001 at Galerie Karin Guenther, Hamburg, Kiosk has since travelled to various public institutions, galleries and artist-run spaces across Europe. These include Manifesta 4, Frankfurter Kunstverein, Frankfurt am Main; Witte de With, Rotterdam; Kunst-Werke, Berlin and the 9th Istanbul Biennial, Istanbul.
object-oriented ontology
Typically taking the form of a reading room or library and reconfigured by a different artist or designer at each new location, Kiosk has continually expanded and metamorphosed with each new venue that it has travelled to thus reflecting current trends and thinking.
Kiosk has been organised and compiled by Christoph Keller, founder and former director of Revolver – Archiv für aktuelle Kunst, a Frankfurt-based publishing house, which has concentrated on producing artists books since 1999.
Liam Gillick: Edgar Schmitz
With special guest appearance by Josh Smith and Christopher Wool

Edgar Schmitz is an exhibition conceived by British artist and Turner Prize nominee Liam Gillick in response to an invitation from the ICA to create the display for the exhibition Kiosk. Gillick extended this invitation in turn by asking the London-based German artist and writer Edgar Schmitz to collaborate with him on the creation of the project.
Gillick has made Edgar Schmitz the source of his project at the ICA, referring to him as both the title and the content of the exhibition. By doing this, Gillick echoes the central theme of Kiosk, which is focused on the idea that publications are used by their readers as a source of information they can further apply in different contexts.

Physically connecting his project with Kiosk, Gillick has developed a complex of bright, red wooden structures, which divide the space of the gallery. Each element incorporates an open vertical framework with a bench/shelf system that can be used both as a place to display the archive and as a place to sit and read. Schmitz projected loop derived from Rainer Werner Fassbinders film Third Generation is continually shown in the main gallery space and a mutated soundtrack taken from the film plays on specially designed speakers in the Concourse. To extend this arrangement further, a new work by Christopher Wool, made in collaboration with Josh Smith, acts as a mute sign and announcement of this meeting of strategies.

object-oriented ontology

Scenery 2 (a Reconstruction) is the 2nd exhibition in a series of art projects presented under the title Scenery and curated by Jan Van Woensel.

The Expo Hall of de Brakke Grond houses a copy of a squatted house in Antwerp. In June, 2004, Jan Van Woensel organized the exhibition Scenery 1 (Proposing a Space Between) in that property. The central theme of that project was the interaction between space, the works of art and the audience. Not only the works of art, but also the entire exhibition space was measured and represented in drawings, maps and a scale model. These replicas and the in situ made video films of the works of art form the starting point of the of the exhibition Scenery 2 (a Reconstruction). The construction in de Brakke Grond, is made to scale, 20 meters deep, 14 meters wide and 6 meters high. It is not an exact copy of the squat, but a simplified architectural construction. The result is a large panel consisting of semi-transparent screens upon which video films of the works of art are being projected. This construction resembles a décor, a film set or a large scale model of the squatted property.

Lecture: 9th December, 2005, 2pm-5pm followed by the exhibition opening
The opening of the exhibition will begin with a lecture, which was organized in collaboration with W139. Guy Bovyn (arts critic, Ghent) will talk about the exhibition being a repeat of the same with a small difference. Papo Colo (artist/curator and founder of Exit Art in New York) will explain his own perspective as a cultural producer and talk about his first Exit Biennial: The Reconstruction (2003). Jan Van Woensel, curator of the Scenery Trilogy, will present and explain the scope of the exhibition by means of an extensive reconstruction of his work process.

Do criticism and theory make any contribution to art? Why not just experience the art and forget about the theory and the criticism?

The word 'art' originally meant 'skill', and sometimes it still does (the art of cooking, of massage, etc.) But now it has another meaning (roughly, painting, sculpture, music, dance, film, poetry, fiction, installations, performance art, etc.). Does art of this kind have to show skill? 

Is it possible to define art, or to say what makes art different from non-art? 

Why do people care about this question? Would the question be easier to answer if 'art' meant 'skill'? ( A hint about "defining" something like art: When a word has a use in a language, its meaning cannot simply be 'up to you'.  Even the meaning of "delicious" is not up to you in that way, although your tastes won't be exactly the same as anyone else's. But just repeating the dictionary doesn't help much, either.  What other options might you have?) 

Should we recognize a sharp distinction between fine art, commercial art, popular art, and craftwork?  Are these distinctions made in every time and culture?  And if not, how did they develop in our culture?


What (if anything) do the (fine) arts have in common?


How do different arts (e.g., poetry and music) accomplish similar things when they work together (e.g., in a song)?


What are the unique possibilities and limits of particular arts? (For example, what can film do that other arts cannot? What can it not do easily, that other arts can?) How do these possibilities and limits affect the project of "translating" a work from one medium to another (e.g. from book to film, or from poem to music)? How do the differences and similarities between different arts affect a project that combines several arts? (These questions are usually most fruitful when you are considering particular examples.)

What is a symbol?
How does art mean?  How does the answer to this question differ with the different arts? (e.g., painting, music, dance, poetry). Is the dimension of meaning essential to every fine art?
How do the different arts express emotion (if they do)?

What's the status of aesthetic standards?  Do they simply express individual or cultural tastes?  Is there anything objective about them?

What's the nature of aesthetic properties?  (E.g., beauty, integrity, unity, mood, expressiveness, etc.)  Are they in any sense "objective"?  Or are they simply "in the eye (or ear) of the beholder"? What do they have to do with the senses?

How do the arts relate to: Spirituality?  Morality?  Emotions?  Economic power and class structure?  Philosophy?  Culture and cultural development?

What's the relationship between the arts, biology and psychology? For example, is there a biological or a universal psychological basis for our love of music and dance? For our association of certain colors with certain emotions?

What's the relationship, if there is one, between appreciation of art works and appreciation of nature?

Can animals be artists?

Is there any special connection between art and gender, or between art and sex or the erotic?

How important is performance to art? Is there anything like performance in the non-performance arts?


Both Zhang Hongtu’s political Pop of the 1980s and his recent canvases treat images of Mao Zedong, Chinese art, and Western painting like readymades, while somehow not surrendering to irony. The Queens-based Chinese artist’s first survey in the US will span more than sixty years of production. Early works include sketchy landscape studies and portraits of peasants that Zhang made as a student in Beijing and in service to Communist Party messaging, respectively. Not long after moving to New York in 1982, he began incorporating the once-omnipresent silhouette of Mao into a variety of media—Ping-Pong tables, Quaker Oats containers, a reproduction of The Last Supper, and so on. This brazen appropriation of China’s secular deity by a native reverberated in artistic circles and influenced a period of explicitly political artmaking. A catalogue boasting twelve texts by specialists in the field aims to contextualize Zhang’s remarkable practice and to affirm his legacy.

SculptureCenter’s Ruba Katrib has selected and commissioned sculpture, video, printmaking, and performance works from a strong cohort of eight artists for an exhibition whose curatorial premise is inspired by the Factory of the Eccentric Actor, founded in Petrograd in 1921. That group endeavored to employ biomechanical precision—in the way that circus clowns, magicians, and acrobats do—to court the unexpected and produce illusion. Contemporary practitioners Sanya Kantarovsky, Adriana Lara, Ieva Misevičiūtė, Eduardo Navarro, Jeanine Oleson, Georgia Sagri, Zhou Tao, and Tori Wrånes similarly defy expectations with formally and conceptually reflexive works that delight and enlighten through off-kilter explorations of physical laws, media conditions, and social roles. A catalogue and a free program of new performances by four of the artists will accompany the show.

Anyone who has followed Anri Sala’s career will have noticed the key role acoustics play in his films and installations: modernist music, free jazz, punk rock, even just the sound of a lone snare drum. Often distorted through delays and echoes, a tune might at first be indecipherable: In Tlatelolco Clash, 2011, for instance, a recognizable version of the Clash’s hit “Should I Stay or Should I Go” emerges only toward the end. As in many of Sala’s works, the fractured music seems to echo the historical and political ruptures of the site where it is performed—here, a town square in Mexico City. With a catalogue comprising essays by Gioni and assistant curator Natalie Bell, as well as Benjamin H. D. Buchloh, Tacita Dean, Mark Godfrey, Boris Groys, and Christine Macel, this major solo show—the artist’s first such outing in New York—will explore the relationship between sound and site, music and architecture, in the artist’s work.

Los Angeles, 1981. Rat and Bear walk into a gallery speaking Schweizerdeutsch, looking for fame, money, purpose. Stumbling upon a dead body, they empty its pockets and walk off with the corpse. An unexpected opportunity arises, and they run with it. Robbing the dead and snatching bodies? It would be stupid of me to find a summation of more than thirty years’ work in this scene from Peter Fischli and the late David Weiss’s first film, The Point of Least Resistance. But the two artists have always seemed sympathetic to the uncreative thought—deploying it to brilliant effect, using forms others might have pronounced inert or worse: carved trompe l’oeil studio clutter, photos of gardens, a sculpture of a rock atop another rock. Often mistaken for being funny, their poker-faced works and laconic titles—Equilibres, Suddenly This Overview, Rock on Top of Another Rock—could be the answers to the universe or just a passing shrug. The Guggenheim’s spiraling ramp seems to have been waiting for the makers of The Way Things Go. Finally, this overview.

Celebrating its fiftieth anniversary, El Museo del Barrio (in partnership with the Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Buenos Aires) will revisit the Museum of Modern Art’s 1965 exhibition “The Responsive Eye,” with the stated ambition of presenting the history of Op art from a Latin American perspective. The show includes some seventy paintings, sculptures, and environments produced during the 1950s, ’60s, and ’70s by some fifty artists, including Julio Le Parc, Carlos Cruz-Diez, and Jesús Rafael Soto (who refused to participate in MoMA’s show) as well as several others whose “origins” are not South American—e.g., Bridget Riley and Victor Vasarely. Yet many Latin American artists of the time strove to be universal, such that the necessity of a geographic perspective invites paradox. Surely the catalogue, with essays by the curator, MACBA director Aldo Rubino, Ariel Jimenez, Luiz Camillo Osorio, and Rocío Aranda-Alvarado, will engage this very issue.

This summer from 4 June to 2 October 2005 a large part of the Kröller-Müller Museums sculpture garden will be transformed into Atelier Van Lieshouts Happy Forest. More than thirty art works colourful sculptures and mobile homes by Atelier Van Lieshout (AVL) will be installed on the events field and in the surrounding woods, ensuring an exciting treasure hunt for the visitor.

Atelier Van Lieshout is an internationally renowned multidisciplinary company that works on contemporary art, design and architectural projects. The artist Joep van Lieshout founded AVL in 1995 to emphasise that his various products are the result of teamwork. AVLs output varies from mobile homes, modular bathrooms and kitchen units, sculptures, large installations and other functional art works, often in AVLs hallmark material brightly coloured polyester.
Happy Forest contains several works designed for self-sufficient living, a recurrent theme in AVLs work. The mobile units include Mobile Home for the Kröller-Müller, Workshop for Weapons and Bombs and a complete Pioneers set. Small living units and sculptures representing internal organs will be dotted amongst the surrounding woods.

The Church of Fear will be stopping off at the south roof terrace at Museum Ludwig. Parallel to the 20th World Youth Day in August 2000, a small wooden church that Christoph Schlingensief first presented in summer 2003 at the 50th Venice Biennale as an information centre for the Church of Fear will be set up in Cologne.

The Church of Fear, founded at the onset of the Iraq War by film maker, stage director and action artist Christoph Schlingensief together with eight further initiators, sees itself as an open alliance of fear. Starting point is the avowal of ones own fear, rather than putting ones money on the ideas hawked by political sectarians, TV evangelists or global conspiracists. Without bowing to dogmas or making any promises, the Church of Fear aims at a practical artistic dialogue with ideological groups in order to avert the production and exploitation of fear by the spokesmen, prophets and messiahs of politics, the press, culture, and business. The Church of Fear now has almost 100 congregations and over 370 support groups worldwide. It is time to take fear into the offensive.

Information on the Church of Fear is available under www.church-of-fear.net. and www.cof.com.ly.

Since the beginning of July Romanian artist Dan Perjovschi draws on the walls of the DC:Room with a marker pen. Within a few short weeks the entire room will be filled with drawings from top to bottom. This is truly work in progress. Visitors are invited to watch the artist at work, to protest, to give him their comments or fire him on with good ideas. And anyone who simply wants to look on can take a seat in Franz Wests “Kantine.

Some of the Romanian artists drawings are reminiscent of newspaper cartoons, and others of doodles done on the phone. But all are as simple and direct as a punch. Reduced to the essentials, they fly out at the viewer. Sometimes they are political, sometimes very political, but they never lack humour. Which means even topics like the Iraq war and the mini-job, or art war and the mini-artist have an anarchic levity so often missing from newspaper leaders and the leaders of the pack.

Both exhibitions are supported by the AC:/DC: Förderkreis, and additionally Dan Perjovschi is being sponsored by Linklaters Oppenhoff & Rädler and the Ifa-Institut für Auslandsbeziehungen.

On each Saturday from July 9th until the opening of the exhibition, the German newspaper taz will feature a drawing by Dan Perjovschi.

On Perjovschi. A dialogue with F.W. Bernstein and Harald Kretzschmar on August 23, 2005, 7 p.m. in the Museum Ludwig cinema.

Each project is accompanied by a catalogue published by Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther König. As a media art project, the July issue of the Cologne monthly StadtRevue contained a supplement by Dan Perjovschi; the August issue contains a supplement by Christoph Schlingensief.

Sara Arrhenius has wanted to break with the image of biennials as broad survey of large groups of artists. Instead she has invited twelve artists who have been given the opportunity to develop new projects or to show a number of works. In order to create a common ground for the work on the exhibition she gathered the artists and catalogue writers already in the spring of 2005 for a seminar in Goteborg. The seminar was the starting point for the exhibition that will take physical shape in September in the venues.

The exhibition gathers artists who in various ways, film, installation, performance, audio and painting, investigate and question todays documentary paradigm. They ask about the ideology and rhetoric active behind the images and narratives that we call reality and what these images want to convey to us. Why has one kind of image become so dominant in our culture and what are the alternatives? Is art able to create other languages, images and realities?

Art Museum Tennis Palace presents A Strange Heaven, introducing some 42 contemporary Chinese artists from China, Taiwan and Hong Kong, of whom two currently reside abroad. The comprehensive exhibition, filling both floors of the museum, spans the last 15 years of Chinese photography and represents the most extensive exhibition of its kind ever shown Finland.

During the past ten years, contemporary Chinese art has increasingly established itself on the international art scene. Almost without exception the main focus has been on painting, video art, installation works, music and architecture, whilst photography remained peripheral. Since the beginning of the 1990s, however, Chinese photographers have also emerged and received recognition as photography has evolved into an independent art form.

The principal themes of the exhibition are founded on the diversity of contemporary Chinese reality. For the most part, the works deal with individual identity, family and present society in times of rapid transition and development. Many of the works are inspired by the aesthetics of ancient cultures and philosophical traditions, and others by recent political upheavals. Chinas economy has been expanding rapidly for some decades, which has led to unanticipated social change. This, too, is reflected in the works, which deal with problems that are relatively new to China: urbanisation and globalisation. Many of the artists also deal with the universal problems of sexuality, sensuality and gender.

Victor Burgin: Voyage to Italy is a Tangent exhibition on view from 7 December 2006 until 25 March 2007, featuring new works commissioned by the CCA. British conceptual artist Victor Burgin has created formally powerful black and white photographs and an evocative video that engage the timeless beauty and lasting resonance of a Carlo Fratacci photograph of Pompeii. Conceived by Hubertus von Amelunxen, visiting curator of the CCA Photographs Collection, the Tangent exhibition series seeks to bring contemporary artists into dialogue with the CCA’s rich collection.

The exhibition comprises three works Burgin created in 2006, Voyage to Italy, a single screen digital video projection with sound, and Basilica I and Basilica II, two series of black and white photographs accompanied by text; as well as the nineteenth-century photograph by Carlo Fratacci that inspired them. Fratacci’s image of the Basilica at Pompeii derives from an album of 26 albumen silver prints in the CCA Photographs Collection entitled Principales Vues de Pompéi par Charles Fratacci, Naples 1864.

The ruins of Pompeii are understood by Burgin as a simultaneous moment of destruction and preservation: the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79 annihilated the city of Pompeii and its inhabitants while conserving the traces for later civilisations. The ruin thus acts as an archive of the past. Photographs perform a similar action, fixing a living presence into a still image while capable of recalling a life long since ended. As Burgin writes, every photograph is the trace of a previous state of the world, a vestige of how things were. The sum of all photographs is the ruin of the world.

Victor Burgin: Voyage to Italy is part of the Tangent exhibition series, conceived to engage artists in reflection on the relationship between photography and architecture, beginning with a body of photographs from the CCA’s collection. The commissioned works enter the CCA collection.
The CCA Photographs Collection is dedicated to the history of photography as it relates to architecture and the built environment. Begun in 1974, it comprises more than 55,000 items dating from 1839 to today. The objective of the collection is to bring together works that will make it possible to study and understand the presence and role of photography in the representation of architecture, the city, and landscape.

The CCA is an international research centre and museum founded in 1979 on the conviction that architecture is a public concern. Based on its extensive collections, the CCA is a leading voice in advancing knowledge, promoting public understanding, and widening thought and debate on the art of architecture, its history, theory, practice, and role in society today.

White Box is pleased to present Annie Rattis site-specific installation Evaporated Sea. Annie Rattis installation radically alters White Boxs seemingly archeological space by filling it with crystalline sea salt, challenging visitors to revise the parameters by which they view art and overturning any preconceptions they had about what constitutes an exhibition space. The floor is encrusted in salt and viewers experience the floating feeling of the sea by walking along the elevated wooden deck, allowing people to view the installation from its center. Eric Saties music combined with video images further enhances a receptive environment.

Annie Rattis Evaporated Sea is a kind of composite psychological window reflecting the appearance, disappearance, and the reincarnation of memories attached to social complexities. The rotational video images projected on three different walls of White Box are her own version of Red Balloon in New York City reminiscent of French filmmaker Lamorisses 1956 classic. In Rattis film, a lonely red balloon randomly soars through a forest of buildings in Manhattan, past Central Park and Times Square, down into China Town, with a train crossing the Brooklyn Bridge in which an anonymous crowd rides the wind like a free soul. The city filled with burdens and agonies appears symbolically touched by the sight of the red balloon and finally seems to arrive at the land of tranquility. Annie Ratti has produced her video with Canadian cinematographer Christopher Walters.

Annie Ratti has been working with video, photography, installation, and literary essays to question and rethink the contemporary human and urban conflicts, states of uncertainty, and unexpected perceptual cracks born out of perpetual comings and goings from her native country of Italy to France, the United Kingdom and the United States.

The show examines affinities between the two artists, who, though separated by generation and geography, share aesthetic and conceptual concerns. The exhibition focuses on the metaphoric use of materials, the belief in metamorphosis, and the relationship between action and its documentation in their respective practices. It also reveals fundamental, philosophical differences between Barney and Beuys that, in turn, further enhances our understanding of each artists work.

The exhibitions contents are drawn largely from the Guggenheim Museum’s permanent collection and pair a selection of drawings and vitrines by both artists, as well as Barneys multipart sculpture Chrysler Imperial (2002) from CREMASTER 3 with Beuys’ installation Terremoto (1981). The presentation will also examine the performative side of their practices, giving evidence to the way they both have theatricalized their sculptural production.

Organized by Nancy Spector, the exhibition will travel to the Peggy Guggenheim Collection in Venice during the 2007 Venice Biennale.

Additional to the show an extensive supporting program takes place allowing the visitor to immerse oneself deeper in the artists conceptions and thoughts.
A large film program takes up the concept of the exhibition and juxtaposes a selection of films by both artists and is screened at the cinema babylon berlin:mitte as well as at the Deutsche Guggenheim.

Dornbracht is not only active as an international manufacturer of design fittings and accessories, but has also been initiating and sponsoring projects in the field of art and culture for over ten years, and is currently supporting the exhibition series Into Me / Out of Me. The exhibition is about the imagined, descriptive, and performative act of the passing into, through, and out of the human body.
Into Me / Out of Me represents an exploration of the art of performance since the 1960s and is the fourth project in this year after the Dornbracht Installation Project 40 Years of Chinese Rock´n Roll by Thomas Bayrle at the MMK in Frankfurt, a performance by the drummer Dave Nuss in Berlin, and the exhibition Keine Donau by Peter Kogler at the Kölnischer Kunstverein to be initiated and supported by Dornbracht Culture Projects.
Into Me / Out of Me features works of art by international artists and employs a wide range of media. The exhibition highlights the concrete and metaphorical ways in which humans interact with each other, themselves, and material matter. The focus is on three primordial and radical relationships between the internal and the external: metabolism (eating, drinking, excreting), reproduction (intercourse, birth), and violence (shooting, impaling, perforating). These complex vital exchanges are illuminated through mythological confrontations, ritualized practices, and self-exploration. The physicality, permeability, and fragility of the body all provide us with insight into the manner in which the human body has been represented in contemporary art over the past four decades.

Much has been written about the connection between sci-fi cinema of the 1950s and 60s and the Cold War, where fear of invasion, communism and nuclear war was played out in films that projected the anxieties of the present onto the future. In recent years many artists have similarly used science fiction and extra-terrestrial forms as a way of exploring racial difference and as a potent metaphor for the threat of the outsider.
Alien Nation is curated by John Gill, Jens Hoffmann and Gilane Tawadros and presents the work of twelve contemporary international artists all of whom explore themes of otherness and difference through the language and iconography of sci-fi. The witty and provocative artworks on display encompass film, sculpture, photography, installation, drawing and painting and expose a disturbing contemporary narrative in which the media perpetuate a terror of invasion from immigrants and asylum seekers (indeed any racial, cultural or ethnic other), positioning such outsiders as the dominant threat to both family and national stability.

Mingling fact and fiction, science and art, Alien Nation will also include a collection of original sci-fi film posters from the 1950s as well as extracts from archive science fiction films that reveal our innermost fears and fantasies about the outsider.

Göteborgs Konsthall is pleased to announce the opening of The Place of Art, a video installation by renowned artist, Esther Shalev-Gerz. The work is divided in separate but complementary parts shown in two places in Göteborg: Bergsjön Centrum (Rymdtorgets shopping centre) and Göteborgs Konsthall.

In her project The Place of Art the artist Esther Shalev-Gerz brings the discussion about the relationship between art and context in touch with peoples everyday lives. The starting point for the project has been to consider the place of art in different traditions, as seen through the eyes of people with varying cultural backgrounds. The work is based on the contributions of 38 artists living in the district of Bergsjön in Göteborg, who have responded to the questions: How would you define art, and Where would you locate the place where it happens?

Thanks to the participation of these artists the project invokes personal visions about the place of art, linking actual situations with fictional ideas, and personal experiences with imagined or ideal circumstances. Memories and thoughts as to where art takes place in the participants cultures are related to their present lives and spaces. The project thus intertwines the past, the present and the future as well as different contexts and provides a basis for possible renegotiations.

In Bergsjön Centrum the installation includes a silent movie presenting the artists and their art definitions, listening to their own descriptions in the intimacy of their homes. Between the sequences, quotes about art are inserted from artists from all over the world renowned as well as less so. The quotes are taken from the Parisian exhibition, Magicians de la Terre, which in 1989 sparked both praise and controversy for its post-colonial approach. In Göteborgs Konsthall the installation consists of the participants voices talking about their places of art together with four visual propositions for those imagined spaces. The proposed models relate to four different places: kitchen, studio, the culture house and the non-place.

By means of two exhibition venues for The Place of Art Esther Shalev-Gerz invites visitors actively to reconnect the viewpoints of the various participants and to contribute with their own. At the same time the voice of institutional authority as to what comprises art is silenced, being replaced by a range of linked spatial constructions and cultural domains and the creation of a platform for an ongoing investigation.

Participation is a central aspect of Esther Shalev-Gerzs work and in this project the principle has been applied even at the level of organisation. From the start various art associations and institutions along with municipal departments and companies were involved in a special collaboration, thus providing yet another approach to a discussion of the relationship between art and place.

Esther Shalev-Gerz is internationally recognised for her seminal contributions to the field of art in the public realm and her consistent investigation into the nature of democracy, cultural memory and the politics of public space. For over 20 years her work has focused on interventions and projects in public space, taking the form of collaboration and exchange with the public. Esther Shalev-Gerz is based in Paris. Since 2003 she has been a professor at the Valand School of Fine Arts, University of Göteborg.